Race and relative deprivation in the urban United States
RD Vanneman, TF Pettigrew - Race, 1972 
This study develops out of two separate literatures in social psychology-one concerned with
the subjective aspects of social stratification, the other with the correlates of racial attitudes.
The first of these areas has a rich history in social science, while the second is of recent
vintage. We shall sketch out briefly these two literatures, followed by the presentation of our
research findings relevant to both.

Racial policy and racial conflict in the urban United States, 1869–1924
S Olzak, S Shanahan
Social Forces, 2003•academic.oup.com
Abstract
This article extends existing explanations of racial conflict by suggesting how legislation and court rulings instigate processes of legitimation and competitive exclusion, which in turn affect the likelihood of racial violence. We argue that federal legislation and court cases that reinforced the white-nonwhite racial boundary stigmatized nonwhites and prompted whites to attack nonwhites. However, legislation and court rulings that dismantled segregation and eradicated discrimination against racial minorities also instigated racial violence, as whites mobilized efforts to contain competition. A final argument suggests that when legislation successfully restrains competition from a specific population, collective violence against that group will diminish. Using data on collective violence against Asians and African Americans from the 76 largest cities in the U.S. from 1869 through 1924, we find support for these three claims. In particular, we find that while immigration and economic competition raise levels of racial conflict, state policies concerning race also increase the rate of racial violence significantly.

Intersection of living in a rural versus urban area and race/ethnicity in explaining access to health care in the United States
JT Caldwell, CL Ford, SP Wallace, MC Wang, LM Takahashi
American journal of public health, 2016•ajph.aphapublications.org
Objectives. To examine whether living in a rural versus urban area differentially exposes populations to social conditions associated with disparities in access to health care.
Methods. We linked Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (2005–2010) data to geographic data from the American Community Survey (2005–2009) and Area Health Resource File (2010). We categorized census tracts as rural and urban by using the Rural–Urban Commuting Area Codes. Respondent sample sizes ranged from 49 839 to 105 306. Outcomes were access to a usual source of health care, cholesterol screening, cervical screening, dental visit within recommended intervals, and health care needs met.
Results. African Americans in rural areas had lower odds of cholesterol screening (odds ratio[OR] = 0.37; 95% confidence interval[CI] = 0.25, 0.57) and cervical screening (OR = 0.48; 95% CI = 0.29, 0.80) than African Americans in urban areas. Whites had fewer screenings and dental visits in rural versus urban areas. There were mixed results for which racial/ethnic group had better access.
Conclusions. Rural status confers additional disadvantage for most of the health care use measures, independently of poverty and health care supply.

Race, ethnicity, income concentration and 10-year change in urban greenness in the United States
JA Casey, P James, L Cushing, BM Jesdale, R Morello-Frosch
International journal of environmental research and public health, 2017•mdpi.com
Background
Cross-sectional studies suggest urban greenness is unequally distributed by neighborhood demographics. However, the extent to which inequalities in greenness have changed over time remains unknown.
Methods
We estimated 2001 and 2011 greenness using Moderate-resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) satellite-derived normalized difference vegetative index (NDVI) in 59,483 urban census tracts in the contiguous U.S. We fit spatial error models to estimate the association between baseline census tract demographic composition in 2000 and (1) 2001 greenness and (2) change in greenness between 2001 and 2011.
Results
In models adjusted for population density, climatic factors, housing tenure, and Index of Concentration at the Extremes for income (ICE), an SD increase in percent White residents (a 30% increase) in 2000 was associated with 0.021 (95% CI: 0.018, 0.023) higher 2001 NDVI. We observed a stepwise reduction in 2001 NDVI with increased concentration of poverty. Tracts with a higher proportion of Hispanic residents in 2000 lost a small, statistically significant amount of greenness between 2001 and 2011 while tracts with higher proportions of Whites experienced a small, statistically significant increase in greenness over the same period.
Conclusions
Census tracts with a higher proportion of racial/ethnic minorities, compared to a higher proportion of White residents, had less greenness in 2001 and lost more greenness between 2001 and 2011. Policies are needed to increase greenness, a health-promoting neighborhood asset, in disadvantaged communities.

Whites' neighbourhood racial preferences and neighbourhood racial composition in the United States: evidence from the multi‐city study of urban inequality
KR Ihlanfeldt, B Scafidi
Housing studies, 2004•Taylor & Francis
Within the housing segregation literature major disagreements have developed over two fundamental issues: (1) the role that whites' aversion to racially mixed neighbourhoods plays in causing modern segregation in the US; and (2) the factors that underlie this aversion, including the effects of inter‐racial contact on whites' neighbourhood racial preferences and whether these preferences reflect neighbourhood stereotyping as opposed to pure racial prejudice. Extant evidence on these issues is either old or indirect. This paper provides direct evidence on these issues using new data from the Multi‐City Study of Urban Inequality. The results suggest that (1) whites' neighbourhood racial preferences play an important role in explaining the racial composition of their neighbourhoods; (2) inter‐racial contact in neighbourhoods and workplaces leads to a greater willingness among whites to live with blacks; and (3) although younger and more educated whites express a stronger taste for integration than other whites, the magnitude of these differences leads to only a small increase in the black percentage of the neighbourhood. In addition, the results provide no evidence in support of the hypothesis that whites stereotype black neighbourhoods rather than blacks per se.

Urban crime, race, and the criminal justice system in the United States
S Raphael, M Sills
A Companion to Urban Economics, 2006•Wiley Online Library
The impact of crime on general welfare is profound. Those most directly impacted are the victims of crime. By one estimate, the combination of direct monetary losses and the costs of pain and suffering among crime victims in the United States amounts to 0.5–0.7 percent of GDP (Freeman 1996). Beyond these direct costs are substantial indirect costs associated with reducing the threat of crime. In 1999, federal, state, and local government criminal justice expenditures amounted to $146.5 billion, or 1.6 percent of GDP (Bureau of Justice Statistics 2003). Many households pay significant premiums, either in terms of housing prices or longer commutes, to live in neighborhoods with lower probabilities of victimization. Many also purchase security devices and insurance to minimize the likelihood and costs of being criminally victimized. Moreover, fear of crime often impacts the most mundane personal decisions, such as whether to walk down a given street or through a particular neighborhood, whether to let one’s children play outside, or whether to leave one’s home after dark.
In addition to the costs to actual and potential crime victims, our public response to crime affects the lives of an increasingly growing population of male offenders. Over the past three decades, the US has experienced unprecedented increases in the size of the incarcerated population. In 1977, the number of inmates

Urban racial violence in the United States changing ecological considerations
AD Grimshaw
American Journal of Sociology, 1960•journals.uchicago.edu
During the period of "classic" race-rioting in the United States, the character of violence reflected the social and demographic characteristics of individuals who inhabited specific locales in the city. In overt radical conflict in the post-World War II period, a new pattern has developed: participants with varying social and demographic attributes have been drawn to specific focal points where they give expression to a new militancy. This changed pattern reflects three more basic changes: in the mode and pattern of the assault upon the accomodative structure, in the orientation and activity of organized police forces, and in the nature of the accommodative structure itself.

Rural–urban and racial/ethnic disparities in invasive cervical cancer incidence in the United States, 2010–2014
L Yu, SA Sabatino, MC White
Preventing chronic disease, 2019•pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
Introduction Racial and socioeconomic disparities exist in cervical cancer screening, incidence, and mortality. The purpose of this study was to investigate how cervical cancer stage at diagnosis is associated with rurality and race/ethnicity. Methods We analyzed 2010 through 2014 data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s National Program of Cancer Registries and the National Cancer Institute’s Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program. We compared cervical cancer frequency and age-adjusted incidence for each stage by county-level rurality and race/ethnicity. Results There were 59,432 incident cases of cervical cancer reported from 2010 through 2014. The most common stage at diagnosis was localized (urban, 43.3%; rural 41.3%). Rural counties had higher incidence than urban counties for localized (rate ratio [RR] = 1.11; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.07–1.15), regional (RR = 1.14; 95% CI, 1.10–1.19), and distant (RR = 1.12; 95% CI, 1.05–1.19) stage cervical cancer. Hispanic and non-Hispanic black women had higher incidence of regional and distant cervical cancer than non-Hispanic white women. Non-Hispanic white women in rural counties had higher incidence than those in urban counties at every stage. However, incidence for non-Hispanic white women was lower than for non-Hispanic black or Hispanic women. Conclusion Rural counties had higher incidence of cervical cancer than urban counties at every stage. However, the association of rural residence with incidence varied by race/ethnicity.

Racial inequalities in urban tree canopy exposure across major cities in the United States
W Li, C Li - Urban Forestry & Urban Greening, 2025 - Elsevier
Urban tree canopy (UTC) offers vital ecosystem services and social benefits, yet unequal access, particularly for marginalized racial groups, remains a pressing environmental justice concern. Existing studies on UTC, however, are often city-specific and lack quantitative measures of racial inequality, limiting the generalizability of findings and the formulation of evidence-based environmental justice interventions. In this study, we conduct a nationwide analysis across 370 major U.S. cities, employing a population-weighted model to assess racial disparities in UTC exposure and applying the Kolm-Pollak equally distributed equivalent (EDE) metric to quantify city-level inequality. We find that White residents have the highest UTC exposure (23.7 %) and Hispanic residents the lowest (13.6 %). Notably, while Black residents exhibit a relative advantage in UTC exposure (22.1 %) at the national level, they face the most severe inequalities at the city level, requiring an average 2.69 % canopy increase to attain neighborhood-level benefits equivalent to those of White residents. Our results indicate that racial inequality in UTC exposure exists in nearly 90 % of the sampled cities, with White–minority gaps in UTC exceeding 10 % in the New England and Mid-Atlantic regions. Additionally, racial composition accounts for 13 % of the variance in canopy coverage at the city level. The racial effect remains statistically significant after controlling for socio-economic and other potential confounders. These findings highlight the need for urban greening strategies that explicitly address racial inequalities and incorporate justice-oriented evaluation frameworks.

Race, criminalization and urban mental health in the United States
JR Pamplin, NC Kelsall, KM Keyes, LM Bates, SJ Prins
Current opinion in psychiatry, 2023•journals.lww.com
Summary
There is evidence of significant negative impact of criminalization on mental health; however, more robust research is needed to address the limitations of the current literature. These limitations include few analyses stratified by race, a lack of focus on nonincarceration forms of criminalization, few longitudinal studies limiting causal inference, highly selected samples limiting generalizability and few studies with validated mental health measures.

Urban upbringing and psychiatric disorders in the United States: A racial comparison
H Oh, HL Nicholson Jr, A Koyanagi, L Jacob, J Glass
International Journal of Social Psychiatry, 2021•journals.sagepub.com
Background
Studies that link urbanicity to mental health are mixed depending on outcome and context. More research is needed to examine whether the urban upbringing effect holds true across racial populations in a large and diverse country like the United States.
Methods
We analyzed two large datasets that were administered contemporaneously with similar methods: The National Comorbidity Survey-Replication (NCS-R, Whites) and the National Survey of American Life (NSAL, Blacks). We ran multivariable logistic regression models to examine the associations between area of upbringing (urban/large city, other, rural) and six psychiatric disorders, controlling for sex, age, years of education and income-to-poverty ratio (and ethnicity in the NSAL). We performed these analyses in both the NCS-R and the NSAL separately.
Results
The majority (58.97%) of the White sample grew up in the ‘other’ category (i.e. small town, small city, or suburb of a large city), whereas a much larger percentage (39.89%) of the Black sample grew up in a large city. In the White sample, urban upbringing was not associated with any of the psychiatric disorders at a conventional level of statistical significance. In the Black sample, urban upbringing was associated with greater odds of having mood disorder, alcohol use disorder and drug use disorder, but was not significantly associated with anxiety disorders, PTSD, or eating disorders.
Conclusions
Urban upbringing was not associated with psychiatric disorders among Whites, but was associated with greater odds of mood disorders, alcohol us disorder and drug use disorder among Blacks. Future research can elucidate how differences in urban upbringing between Whites and Blacks are linked to differences in risk for psychiatric disorders.

Widespread race and class disparities in surface urban heat extremes across the United States
SA Benz, JA Burney - Earth's Future, 2021 - Wiley Online Library
Abstract
Here we use remotely sensed land surface temperature measurements to explore the distribution of the United States’ urban heating burden, both at high resolution (within cities or counties) and at scale (across the whole contiguous United States). While a rich literature has documented neighborhood-level disparities in urban heat exposures in individual cities, data constraints have precluded comparisons across locations. Here, drawing on urban temperature anomalies during extreme summer surface temperature events from all 1,056 US counties with more than 10 developed census tracts, we find that the poorest tracts (and those with lowest average education levels) within a county are significantly hotter than the richest (and more educated) neighborhoods for 76% of these counties (54% for education); we also find that neighborhoods with higher Black, Hispanic, and Asian population shares are hotter than the more White, non-Hispanic areas in each county. This holds in counties with both large and small spreads in these population shares, and for 71% of all counties the significant racial urban heat disparities persist even when adjusting for income. Although individual locations have different histories that have contributed to race- and class-based geographies, we find that the physical features of the urban environments driving these surface heat exposure gradients are fairly uniform across the country. Systematically, the disproportionate heat surface exposures faced by minority communities are due to more built-up neighborhoods, less vegetation, and—to a lesser extent—higher population density.

Associations of race/ethnicity with HIV prevalence and HIV-related behaviors among young men who have sex with men in 7 urban centers in the United States
NT Harawa, S Greenland, TA Bingham, DF Johnson, SD Cochran, WE Cunningham…
JAIDS Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes, 2004•journals.lww.com
Abstract
Using data from a multisite venue-based survey of male subjects aged 15 to 22 years, we examined racial/ethnic differences in demographics, partner type, partner type-specific condom use, drug use, and HIV prevalence in 3316 US black, multiethnic black, Latino, and white men who have sex with men (MSM). We further estimated associations of these factors with HIV infection and their influence on racial/ethnic disparities in HIV prevalence. HIV prevalences were 16% for both black and multiethnic black participants, 6.9% for Latinos, and 3.3% for whites. Paradoxically, potentially risky sex and drug-using behaviors were generally reported most frequently by whites and least frequently by blacks. In a multiple logistic regression analysis, positive associations with HIV included older age, being out of school or work, sex while on crack cocaine, and anal sex with another male regardless of reported condom use level. Differences in these factors did not explain the racial/ethnic disparities in HIV prevalence, with both groups of blacks experiencing more than 9 times and Latinos experiencing approximately twice the fully adjusted odds of infection compared with whites. Understanding racial/ethnic disparities in HIV risk requires information beyond the traditional risk behavior and partnership type distinctions. Prevention programs should address risks in steady partnerships, target young men before sexual initiation with male partners, and tailor interventions to men of color and of lower socioeconomic status.

Racial disparities in the heavy metal contamination of urban soil in the Southeastern United States
DH Jones, X Yu, Q Guo, X Duan, C Jia
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 2022•mdpi.com
(1) Background: Field monitoring data for addressing the disproportional burden of exposure to soil contamination in communities of minority and low socioeconomic status (SES) are sparse. This study aims to examine the association between soil heavy metal levels, SES, and racial composition. (2) Methods: A total of 423 soil samples were collected in the urban areas of eight cities across six Southern states in the U.S., in 2015. Samples were analyzed using inductively coupled plasma–mass spectrometry (ICP–MS) for eight heavy metals. The association was examined with mixed models with the log-transformed metal concentrations as the dependent variables and rankings of low-income or minority percentages as the explanatory variables. (3) Results: Model results showed that soil metal concentrations were significantly associated with rankings of poverty and minority percentages. The cadmium concentration significantly increased by 4.7% (p-value < 0.01), for every 10 percentiles of increase in poverty rank. For every 10 percentiles of increase in minority rank, the soil concentrations were significantly up (p-values < 0.01) for arsenic (13.5%), cadmium (5.5%), and lead (10.6%). Minority rank had significant direct effects on both arsenic and lead. (4) Conclusions: The findings confirmed elevated heavy metal contamination in urban soil in low-income and/or predominantly minority communities.

 Urban upbringing and psychotic experiences in the United States: a racial and geographic comparison
HY Oh, A Koyanagi, JE DeVylder, B Link
Psychiatry Research, 2020•Elsevier
Abstract
Urban upbringing has been associated with greater risk for psychotic experiences, though research is needed to confirm whether this is true in the U.S., and whether the association depends on race, type of experience, and region of the country. We analyzed data from the National Comorbidity Survey Replication (White respondents only) and the National Survey of American Life (Black respondents). Multivariable logistic regression models found that urban upbringing was not significantly associated with lifetime psychotic experiences for Whites, but was significantly associated with lower odds for Blacks, adjusting for socio-demographic covariates and common mental disorders. Rural upbringing was associated with greater odds of lifetime auditory hallucinatory experiences for Blacks. Exploratory analyses suggested growing up in a large city or ‘other’ environment were associated with greater odds of lifetime psychotic experiences among Whites currently residing in the Northeast, but lower odds among Whites residing in the South. For Blacks currently residing in the West, rural upbringing was associated with significantly greater odds of lifetime psychotic experiences when compared with growing up in a large city. White and Blacks may have different lived experiences in urban and rural settings, calling for more race- and location- specific research to explain these diverging patterns.

Racial, ethnic, and gender disparities in awareness of preexposure prophylaxis among HIV-negative heterosexually active adults at increased risk for HIV …
AR Baugher
MMWR. Morbidity and mortality weekly report, 2021•cdc.gov
Discussion
In 2019, PrEP use among eligible heterosexually active adults was negligible (< 1%), and approximately one in three heterosexually active adults was aware of PrEP. Overall, men reported lower PrEP awareness than did women. Awareness of PrEP was particularly low among Hispanic persons, with approximately one in six Hispanic women and approximately one in five Hispanic men having heard of PrEP. Awareness of PrEP was also low among persons who were not born in the United States, did not speak English well, or who resided in Puerto Rico. Given the high prevalence of HIV infection among Black persons, it is notable that their PrEP awareness was relatively higher than that among White or Hispanic persons. This might be attributable to HIV prevention campaigns tailored toward Black persons.

How race, ethnicity, and income moderate the relationship between urban vegetation and physical activity in the United States
K Lanza, B Stone Jr, R Haardörfer
Preventive Medicine, 2019•Elsevier
Abstract
To facilitate physical activity interventions, researchers identify which factors associate with physical activity, such as vegetation levels of the surrounding environment. While most studies examining vegetation and physical activity find a positive correlation, the literature does not investigate how vegetation may have a varied effect on physical activity based on demographic composition. This study examined how race, ethnicity, and income moderate the relationship between both non-tree vegetation and tree canopy on the percentage of individuals participating in leisure-time physical activity per census tract. Physical activity data from 2013 to 2014 for 7842 census tracts across 25 US cities originated from the CDC's 500 Cities project. Aerial images from the USDA's National Agriculture Imagery Program were used to classify vegetation levels per tract. Demographic variables originated from the American Community Survey 2011–2015 5-year estimates. Tracts were stratified into four types (Black + low income, Hispanic + low income, White + high income, and remaining) and assessed through multilevel modeling as to whether tract type moderated the relationship between vegetation and physical activity. Results showed that non-tree vegetation negatively associated with physical activity across all census tract types, while tree canopy exhibited a mixed association with physical activity, based on tract type. These findings can spur further research into how vegetation impacts physical activity of different demographic groups, and potentially inform greenspace and tree planting installments in those areas at greatest risk for physical inactivity-related diseases.

The post-1965 trajectory of race, class, and urban politics in the United States reconsidered
A Reed Jr
Labor Studies Journal, 2016•journals.sagepub.com
Comments by Larry Bennett, Cynthia Horan, Cedric Johnson, and Timothy Weaver prompted me to reflect on and connect my work on race ideology, the underclass idea, class dynamics in American politics, and the evolution of urban governance and the terms of black political incorporation since the 1990s. Race is best understood as a particular instance of a class of ideologies that work to justify existing hierarchies by reading them into nature. Understanding race in that way helps to see the notion of an urban underclass as also an ideology that seeks to naturalize hierarchy by attributing it to a population defined by durable cultural and behavioral defects, which make it impervious to social intervention. Proliferation of underclass ideology has rationalized retreat from social provision and underwritten a punitive turn in social policy. It has also articulated with the class dynamics driving black politics to generate a basis for an urban neoliberalism steered by an increasingly interracial or biracial governing class committed to diversity and market-driven social policy. New Orleans provides a useful case examination of these dynamics, both through reconsideration of the character of racial transition in local politics in the 1970s and 1980s and through analysis of the forces shaping the post-Katrina political regime. New Orleans’s political development, pre- and post-Katrina, exposes the inadequacy, indeed the class character, of a critical politics based on antiracism as a frame of reference for pursuit of egalitarian interests. More hopeful signs lie in emergence of a strong labor voice in the city.

Rural-urban differences in pulmonary embolism mortality by race-ethnicity and sex in the United States, 1999–2020
B Magod, AK Chokshi, KA Martin, DR Schimmel, SS Khan, NS Shah
Journal of thrombosis and thrombolysis, 2024•Springer
Abstract
Introduction: Racial and ethnic differences in pulmonary embolism (PE) mortality within rural and urban regions in the U.S. have not previously been described. PE mortality may vary across regions and urbanization given disparities in social and structural determinants and comorbid disease. Methods: Using surveillance data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, age-adjusted mortality rates (AAMR) related to PE were calculated for rural and urban regions in the U.S., in non-Hispanic Black and White women and men, between 1999 and 2020. Results: Among 137,946 deaths in urban regions and 41,333 deaths in rural regions due to PE during this period, AAMR decreased 1.8% per year in urban regions from 3.1 to 100,000 in 1999 to 2.2 per 100,000 in 2020, and decreased 1% per year in rural regions from 4.3 to 100,000 in 1999 to 3.3 per 100,000 in 2020. Since 2008, AAMR from PE increased in non-Hispanic White males in rural and urban regions, decreased in non-Hispanic Black females in rural regions, and otherwise remained stagnant in all other race-sex groups. Conclusions: AAMR from PE was higher in rural compared with urban individuals, with differences by race and sex. Mortality rates remained stagnant over the last decade in non-Hispanic Black adults and non-Hispanic White females and increased in non-Hispanic White males.

The United States population by race and urban-rural residence 1790–1860: Reference tables
JR Wilkie
Demography, 1976•Springer
Abstract
The U.S. population by race and urban-rural residence from 1790 to 1860 is presented. The definition of the urban population used is that population residing in incorporated places of 2,500 population or more. The rural population is the residual of the total population minus the urban population, as defined above. The tables provide previously unavailable data on the urban-rural distribution of the black and white populations 1790–1860 and are compatible with data for the total population published by the Census Bureau.

Race, immigration, and homicide in contemporary Europe and the United States: an urban comparison
R Martinez Jr, JA Iwama, JI Stowell
Crime, Law and Social Change, 2015•Springer
Abstract
In this paper we ask a key question: Do immigrants contribute a disproportionate amount of crime beyond what we would expect from native-born populations? We start with a description of the immigration and homicide literature in the United States and Europe and transition into a description of lessons learned from this topic in the United States. Specifically, we compare the level of immigration to white, black, and Latino homicide rates between 1985 and 2009. We compare and contrast racial/ethnic/immigrant group specific homicide rates in the cities of Miami and San Diego from 1980 through 2000. We do so since both cities are major entry points into the United States. We compare these findings to European countries, because there are some similarities on immigration into the United States and Europe and, by extension, the study of immigration and violence. In many ways, the study of urban immigration and homicide in the United States is relevant to the study of urban immigration and homicide in Europe. Many of the topics discussed in this paper are likely to be faced by European countries in the future and our hope is that findings from the United States are useful in other contexts.

Racial disparities in prevalence of gestational diabetes by maternal nativity and length of US residence in an urban low-income population in the United …
LM Shah, YA Kwapong, E Boakye, SM Ogunwole, WL Bennett, RS Blumenthal, AG Hays…
CJC open, 2022•Elsevier
Background
Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is associated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease (CVD). Racial/ethnic differences in GDM prevalence have been described, but disparities by nativity and duration of US residence are not well studied.
Methods
We analyzed data from 6088 women (mean age: 27.5 years [standard deviation: 6.3 years]) from the Boston Birth Cohort who self-identified as non-Hispanic Black (NHB; n = 2697), Hispanic (n = 2395), or non-Hispanic White (NHW; n = 996). Using multivariable logistic regression, we examined the cross-sectional association of nativity and duration of US residence (< 10 vs ≥ 10 years) with GDM within each race/ethnicity group.
Results
Foreign-born NHB, NHW, and Hispanic women with a duration of US residence of < 10 years had a lower prevalence of CVD risk factors than those with US residence of ≥ 10 years, respectively, as follows: smoking (NHB: 1.7% vs 3.1%; NHW: 5.7% vs 8.1%; Hispanic: 0.4% vs 2.6%); obesity (NHB: 17.1% vs 23.4%; NHW: 3.8% vs 15.6%; Hispanic: 10.9% vs 22.7%); and severe stress (NHB: 8.7% vs 11.9%; NHW: 5.7% vs 28.1%; Hispanic: 3.8% vs 7.3%). In analyses adjusting for sociodemographic characteristics and CVD risk factors, foreign-born NHB women with a duration of US residence of < 10 years had higher odds of having GDM (adjusted odds ratio: 1.60, 95% confidence interval: 0.99-2.60), compared with their US-born counterparts, whereas foreign-born Hispanic women with a duration of US residence of < 10 years had lower odds of having GDM (adjusted odds ratio: 0.54, 95% confidence interval: 0.32-0.91). The odds of having GDM in Hispanic and NHB women with a duration of US residence of ≥ 10 years were not significantly different from those of their US-born counterparts.
Conclusions
The “healthy immigrant effect” and its waning with longer duration of US residence apply to the prevalence of GDM among Hispanic women but not NHB women. Further research on the intersectionality of race and nativity-based disparities is needed.

Cross-sector analysis of socioeconomic, racial/ethnic, and urban/rural disparities in food policy enactment in the United States
DR Taber, JF Chriqui, CM Quinn, LM Rimkus… - Health & place, 2016 - Elsevier
We examined racial/ethnic, socioeconomic, and urban/rural disparities in food policy enactment across different sectors, as well as retail food access, throughout the United States. Policy and retail food store data were obtained from 443 communities as part of the Bridging the Gap Community Obesity Measures Project. Our results indicated that median household income was inversely associated with healthier retail food zoning policies in Hispanic communities, where competitive food policies for schools were also healthier and mean fruit/vegetable access in stores was higher. In contrast, income was positively associated with healthier retail food zoning in rural communities, where competitive food policies were weaker. Black communities had low scores across all policy domains. Overall, Hispanic communities had the strongest food policies across sectors. Barriers to policy adoption in both rural and Black communities must be explored further.

The colour of unaffordable household water: racial/ethnic inequalities in bills and shutoffs across local water districts in nine urban areas of the United States
M Sarango, D Kim, SL Harlan
Local Environment, 2025•Taylor & Francis
Abstract
The rapidly rising cost of household water bills is an increasing financial burden and health concern for low-income households in the United States, a nation that offers neither a constitutional right nor an enforceable national statute that ensures peoples’ access to water. Local water districts use their own discretion to develop, implement, and enforce distinct water rate structures, assistance programmes, and non-payment penalties. This study is a statistical analysis of water unaffordability and water shutoffs by racial/ethnic composition of communities in water districts across nine urban areas. We collected cross-sectional survey data from a multistage, stratified non-proportional quota sample of 6,938 adults who are responsible for paying their own household’s water bill. Multivariable logistic regression analyses showed that racial/ethnic inequalities in water affordability and shutoff, previously documented in location-specific studies, are widespread urban problems across the U.S. Communities with greater shares of racial/ethnic minorities were more likely to experience unaffordable water bills compared to predominantly non-Hispanic white communities after controlling for respondents’ household income, age, conservation efforts, and urban area. Communities with greater shares of racial/ethnic minorities had much higher odds of water shutoffs and this association was only partially explained by household water unaffordability. Improvement of local water infrastructure to reduce utilities’ costs for delivering water services and providing more financial assistance for low-income households, which are disproportionately in communities of colour, are serious – and related – problems. We offer recommendations for how municipalities may improve practices and reduce racial/ethnic inequalities in access to affordable water.


Rural–Urban Disparities in Mortality Related to Alcohol-Associated Liver Disease by Race/Ethnicity in the United States From 1999 to 2022
CH Lo, R Verma, R Amin, V Manne, S Saab
Digestive Diseases and Sciences, 2025•Springer
Introduction
Mortality related to alcohol-associated liver disease (ALD) has been increasing over the past two decades, especially in racial and ethnic minorities and those living in rural areas. The interaction between rurality, race and ethnicity in mortality disparities is unclear.
Methods
This cross-sectional study extracted data from the Underlying Cause of Death database of CDC Wide-Ranging Online Database for Epidemiological Research (1999–2022). We estimated the age-adjusted mortality rates (AAMRs) for ALD among adults 25 years and older. We calculated the average annual percentage change (AAPC) using the Joinpoint regression program.
Results
There were 436,814 deaths related to ALD among US adults with rising mortality from 1999 (AAMR, 6.7) to 2022 (AAMR, 12.5) (AAPC, 2.7%). American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) individuals had the highest mortality in 2022 (AAMR, 76.8), followed by Hispanic individuals (AAMR, 14.1). Mortality increases in non-Hispanic White (NHW) individuals (AAPC, 4.0%) surpassed that of non-Hispanic Black (NHB) individuals (AAPC, 0.4%). The increase in AAMR was more pronounced in rural areas (AAPC, 4.1%) than large metropolitan areas (AAPC, 2.0%). For NHW, AI/AN, and Hispanic individuals, AAMRs in rural areas had greater increases than in large metropolitan areas. AAMRs remained largely stable in large metropolitan (AAPC, − 0.6%) and rural areas for NHB individuals (AAPC, 0.1%).
Discussion
There were significant and widening rural–urban disparities in ALD-related mortality among NHW, AI/AN, and Hispanic individuals. Mortality in NHB individuals remained largely stable. Targeted resources and efforts are essential to address the growing mortality burden in select populations.

Self-reported medication use across racial and rural or urban subgroups of people who are pregnant in the United States: decentralized app-based cohort …
T Ajayi, J Pawelek, H Bhargava, A Faksh, J Radin
JMIR Formative Research, 2023•formative.jmir.org
Abstract
Background: Maternal health outcomes have been underresearched due to people who are pregnant being underrepresented or excluded from studies based on their status as a vulnerable study population. Based on the available evidence, Black people who are pregnant have dramatically higher maternal morbidity and mortality rates compared to other racial and ethnic groups. However, insights into prenatal care—including the use of medications, immunizations, and prenatal vitamins—are not well understood for pregnant populations, particularly those that are underrepresented in biomedical research. Medication use has been particularly understudied in people who are pregnant; even though it has been shown that up to 95% of people who are pregnant take at least 1 or more medications. Understanding gaps in use could help identify ways to reduce maternal disparities and optimize maternal health outcomes.
Objective: We aimed to characterize and compare the use of prenatal vitamins, immunizations, and commonly used over-the-counter and prescription medications among people who are pregnant, those self-identifying as Black versus non-Black, and those living in rural versus urban regions in the United States.
Methods: We conducted a prospective, decentralized study of 4130 pregnant study participants who answered survey questionnaires using a mobile research app that was only available on iOS (Apple Inc) devices. All people who were pregnant, living in the United States, and comfortable with reading and writing in English were eligible. The study was conducted in a decentralized fashion with the use of a research app to facilitate enrollment using an eConsent and self-reported data collection.
Results: Within the study population, the use of prenatal vitamins, antiemetics, antidepressants, and pain medication varied significantly among different subpopulations underrepresented in biomedical research. Black participants reported significantly lower frequencies of prenatal vitamin use compared to non-Black participants (P<. 001). The frequency of participants who were currently receiving treatment for anxiety and depression was also lower among Black and rural groups compared to their non-Black and urban counterparts, respectively. There was significantly lower use of antidepressants (P=. 002) and antiemetics (P=. 02) among Black compared to non-Black participants. While prenatal vitamin use was lower among participants in rural areas, the difference between rural and urban groups did not reach statistical significance (P=. 08). There were no significant differences in vaccine uptake for influenza or tetanus-diphtheria-pertussis (TDaP) across race, ethnicity, rural, or urban status.
Conclusions: A prospective, decentralized app-based study demonstrated significantly lower use of prenatal vitamins, antiemetics, and antidepressants among Black pregnant participants. Additionally, significantly fewer Black and rural participants reported receiving treatment for anxiety and depression during pregnancy. Future research dedicated to identifying the root mechanisms of these differences can help improve maternal health outcomes, specifically for diverse communities.

Racial/ethnic residential segregation and urban spatial networks in the United States
KF Anderson, J Galaskiewicz
Handbook of Cities and Networks, 2021•elgaronline.com
An old assumption in geography is that everything is related to everything else, but near things are more related than distant things (Tobler 1970). For this reason, the focus of urban studies has been on the neighborhood as the primary unit of analysis (Craven and Wellman 1973). However, urban geographers and planners have long known that people circulate in much larger circles than their immediate neighborhoods, and more recent work using big-data approaches have confirmed this on a large scale (Wang et al. 2018). Individuals and families move about the metropolitan area throughout the day in order to meet a wide variety of daily needs, including work, education and leisure. It is also evident that these broad movement patterns vary by the socio-demographic characteristics of residents and households. However, there is little research on the ways in which involuntary racial/ethnic/class-based residential segregation impacts the manner in which people move about the city and the extent of their spatial networks. Our central question is, does exclusionary residential segregation affect the travel distances, trip frequency and mode of travel of households in segregated areas independent of households’ financial and spatial resources? That is, do households that are in segregated neighborhoods tend to have more restricted or broader spatial networks than comparable households in integrated neighborhoods?
We conceptualize two ways of understanding this problem. On the one hand, segregated areas of exclusion are often bereft of organizational resources, thus, residents need to travel farther to access services compared to residents in more integrated neighborhoods. On the other hand, physical and social constraints may prevent this. The situation becomes more or less costly depending upon the available transportation networks in and out of a community. Also, residents of these neighborhoods often are socially stigmatized either by their ascriptive characteristics or the neighborhood they live in. Thus, they are forced to limit their travels to their segregated neighborhood. The first adds undue travel costs; the other two limit access to organizational resources outside of neighborhood boundaries. Either way, segregation based on spatial exclusion exacerbates urban inequality by limiting access to opportunities for some sub-populations. We begin this chapter with a review of the literature on travel behavior, focusing on individual and household factors that are associated with distances traveled, the mode of transportation and trip frequency. Then we discuss exclusionary residential segregation, why it should affect travel times, and how the transportation infrastructure and social stigma can restrict residents’ mobility.

Trends in Remote Patient Monitoring Before and After the COVID-19 Public Health Emergency Declaration in the United States: A Comparison Between Rural/Urban …
R Mahashabde, AA Pandit, M Acharya, MM Ali, CA Bogulski, H Eswaran, CJ Hayes
Telemedicine and e-Health, 2025•liebertpub.com
Background: This study assesses the trend in remote patient monitoring (RPM) utilization among Medicare beneficiaries in the United States with differing rural/urban and racial/ethnic statuses.
Methods: Using Medicare fee-for-service claims from January 2018 to December 2020, monthly rates of beneficiaries utilizing RPM per 100,000 beneficiaries enrolled in both Medicare Parts A and B were calculated. Comparative interrupted time series models delineated differences in level and trend of RPM utilization between beneficiaries with differing rural/urban status, race/ethnicity, and race/ethnicity as stratified by rural/urban status using March 2020, the start of COVID-19 public health emergency (PHE) in the United States, as interruption time.
Results: RPM utilization increased from 2 to 240 RPM claims per 100,000 Medicare beneficiaries from January 2018 to December 2020. Urban beneficiaries experienced a 24.20 RPM user-level change per month at the start of PHE. Trend difference for urban versus rural beneficiaries increased by 7.85 RPM users per month before and after the start of PHE (p < 0.0001). The trend difference for non-Hispanic Black versus White beneficiaries significantly increased by 12.43 RPM users per 100,000 beneficiaries per month after declaration of PHE (p < 0.0001). Similarly, the trend difference for beneficiaries of Hispanic and of other races significantly increased by 7.48 and 16.93 RPM users per 100,000 beneficiaries per month, respectively, after the declaration of the PHE (p < 0.0001 for both). Trends for racial/ethnic minorities stratified by rural/urban status were similar to the overall trends by racial/ethnic group.
Discussion: Inequities in RPM utilization exist and were exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic. Targeted interventions are needed to increase RPM utilization broadly, particularly among rural residents.

 Racial and ethnic diversity in select United States urban neighborhoods, 1980 to 1990
MT Maly
1998•search.proquest.com
Abstract
This dissertation provides a significant contribution to the study of racial residential settlement by offering a multi-method examination of racially and ethnically diverse neighborhoods. First, a systematic analysis, using an innovative measure of diversity, was conducted to assess the extent of racially and ethnically diverse urban neighborhoods in New York and Chicago during the 1980s. Data indicate that although overall levels of segregation remain high, stably diverse neighborhoods did exist in each city. In addition, only a small percentage of these diverse neighborhoods experienced rapid transition or" panic" over the ten year period, calling into question the perceived inevitability of racial transition. Second, field research, including over 40 interviews with community leaders, in Jackson Heights (New York) and Uptown (Chicago) offered multifaceted insight into the social dynamics and processes involved in maintaining diversity. Jackson Heights and Uptown, characterized by multi-dimensional patterns of diversity, illustrated that communities take different paths to becoming diverse. Each community, best described as" diverse by circumstance," was able to maintain its multiethnic and multiracial diversity by community intervention and organizing. Leaders in both Jackson Heights and Uptown arose to negotiate differences and tension over the use of public space, resources, development, preservation, cultural legitimacy, and what constitutes acceptable behavior, physical structures, and interaction. Active intervention by leaders and residents involved indirect (eg, affordable housing, beautification) and direct (eg, community building, pro-diversity programming) strategies and significant investments in time, energy, and money, for improving the community and maintaining the racial and ethnic diversity. While no central organization was developed to sustain the diversity, links were built between smaller, tightly-knit social networks, forming a necessary mosaic of coalitions that prevented rapid racial change. Finally, leaders struggled with the perception that racial diversity was inherently unstable. However, leaders were able to redefine the community as accepting and organized, as leaders and residents became active in" selling" the value of diversity. In sum, this study offers practical and accessible research for scholars, policy analysts, activists, and community leaders seeking alternatives to racially and ethnically segregated communities.

Working More Productively To Produce Similar Patterns of Educational Performance among Racial/Ethnic Groups in the United States. Urban Diversity Series.
Miller, L. Scott
This monograph in the Urban Diversity Series takes an in-depth look at the nature of academic achievement gaps and the efforts since the 1960s to close these gaps. The monograph provides a comprehensive analysis of achievement data from pre-school through higher education. It concludes with recommendations for developing evidence-based educational strategies and creating the organizational requirements necessary for implementing these strategies. The first section of this paper focuses on "Societal Efforts to Improve Educational Outcomes for Underrepresented Groups" (laying the foundations in the 1960s, factors that make closing of achievement and attainment gaps more challenging, and efforts to improve educational outcomes from the late 1960s to the present). The second section presents "Overview of the Academic Achievement Gaps (research suggests that there continue to be large achievement gaps to close in preK-16 education). The third section discusses "Promoting More Rapid Progress Over the Long Term," offering recommendations in two categories (tasks concerned with developing more evidence-based strategies and organizational requirements for pursuing these tasks). The final section discusses the amount of time that will be required to address and remedy the achievement gap It notes that efforts to address the high achievement issue and the within-class issue are not likely to emerge over the next 5-10 years as significant priorities for PreK-16 education because the low achievement of disadvantaged students remains a very pressing matter which will command an enormous amount of attention for a long time, and because few leading academic researchers, school reformers, and policymakers have shown much interest in the high achievement and within-class issues. 

Class, Race, and Urban Politics: the 1920s Ku Klux Klan Movement in the United States
C Rhomberg
Political power and social theory, 2005•emerald.com
Recent research has challenged traditional views of the 1920s-era Ku Klux Klan in the United States. Case studies have shown that the movement appealed to a broad middle-class constituency and advocated a range of popular reforms. These findings have stimulated a provocative debate over whether the movement represented a mainstream “civic populism” or a more racist reaction to change. Here, I review the recent debate and show how the new data are consistent with current sociological models of collective action. Comparing studies of Klan mobilization in several cities, I argue that the movement was both populist and racist, combining processes of contemporary urban racial and class formation. From this perspective, I suggest, the 1920s Klan highlights a critical moment in the development of racial and class identities in 20th century urban America.

Enhancing Educational Equality: A Comprehensive Analysis of the Implementation and Impact of Restorative Justice Practices on Mitigating Racial Disparities in …
A Gil
Law and Economy, 2023•paradigmpress.org
Abstract
This research explores the implementation and impact of restorative justice practices in addressing racial disparities in school discipline within US urban public schools. The study delves into the challenges, successes, and recommendations for sustainable change in policy and practice. Theoretical frameworks and case studies are employed to analyze the influence of restorative justice on school climate, student well-being, and academic outcomes. Identified challenges include resource limitations, resistance to change, inadequate training models, and time constraints. Recommendations encompass policy adjustments, professional development initiatives, continuous evaluation, community partnerships, integration with mental health support, and addressing cultural sensitivity.

Race, class, and urban politics in the United States
MJ Fortner, L Bielicki
Handbook of Urban Politics and Policy, 2024•elgaronline.com
“It is striking that in 1963,” Nathan Glazer and Daniel Patrick Moynihan (1970, 291) observed,“almost forty years after mass immigration from Europe to this country ended, the ethnic pattern is still so strong in New York.” Arguing against canonical accounts that insisted upon a natural assimilative trajectory of the American project, Glazer and Moynihan’s

Racial differences in maternal risk factors associated with adverse pregnancy outcomes: a population-based study exploring urban and rural geographies in the …
SL Clay, MJ Woodson, JA Makelarski, WS Cheng, RJ Alston, J Trask, T Hodges
Journal of Ethnic & Cultural Diversity in Social Work, 2024•Taylor & Francis
Abstract
This paper explores racial differences in maternal risk factors associated with adverse pregnancy outcomes across urban and rural geographies using 2019 data from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System. Bivariate chi-square tests and logistic regression were performed which showed statistically significant geographical differences among Non-Hispanic (NH) Black pregnant women across income levels (p = .016) and perceived health status (p = .003). Regression analyses indicated an increased racial gap between NH White pregnant women and other racial/ethnic groups. The findings support that there are statistically significant racial differences in maternal risk factors across urban and rural geographies for NH Black and Hispanic pregnant women.

Socioeconomic status, race, and preadolescent acne: A population‐based retrospective cohort analysis in a mixed rural–urban community of the United States …
KE Rodriguez Baisi, AL Weaver, CI Wi, H Shakshouk, MM Tollefson
Pediatric dermatology, 2023•Wiley Online Library
Background/Objective
There is limited information about the potential relationship of socioeconomic status (SES) with acne in preadolescents. Our objective was to assess the possible relationship between SES and preadolescent acne.
Methods
A population‐based retrospective cohort study was conducted to identify Olmsted County, Minnesota, residents with an initial acne diagnosis between 7 and ≤12 years old during 2010 to 2018 using the Rochester Epidemiology Project. For each acne case, we randomly selected 2 sex‐ and age‐matched controls without an acne diagnosis from the county. Individual HOUsing‐based SocioEconomic Status index (HOUSES) derived from real property data was used to evaluate SES, represented as four quartiles with higher quartile representing higher SES.
Results
A total of 604 patients met the criteria. HOUSES distribution significantly differed between cases and controls (p = .001); a higher proportion of acne cases were in quartile 4 (42.2% vs. 32.7%), indicating higher SES. Race and ethnicity did not significantly differ between cases and controls. Among cases and controls, 74.5% and 72.3% were White, respectively. Study limitations include its retrospective design, only patients who visited a physician were included, and Olmsted County residents are largely non‐Hispanic White.
Conclusion
Preadolescents diagnosed with acne have a higher SES than those without diagnosed acne, highlighting a potential disparity in access to care and appropriate diagnosis.

Historical census statistics on population totals by race, 1790 to 1990, and by Hispanic origin, 1790 to 1990, for the United States, regions, divisions, and …
C Gibson, K Jung - 2002 - census.gov
… Population of the 100 Largest Cities and Other Urban Places in the United States: 1790
to 1990, by Campbell Gibson. US Bureau of the … The purpose of this report is to provide
under one cover decennial census data on population totals by race and Hispanic origin for
the United States, for regions and divisions of the United States as defined for statistical
purposes by the Census Bureau, and for states. Tables 1 - 65 show … Based on the relative
sizes of the population of Spanish mother tongue and of Hispanic origin in 1970, 1940 …

Urban-rural variations in racial/ethnic differences in time to treat among individuals newly diagnosed with cancer in the United States 2015-2021
H Cheng, O Palesh, S Hong
Cancer Research, 2025•aacrjournals.org
Abstract
Timely treatment is crucial for effective cancer care. Studies have shown longer durations from diagnosis to treat among non-white racial/ethnic groups in the United States. In this study, we assessed whether racial/ethnic differences in the time to treat vary across urban/rural residents. We conducted a retrospective cohort study of over 3.5 million individuals newly diagnosed with cancer from 2015 to 2021, using data from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) program. We estimated the median number of days from diagnosis to treatment by five racial/ethnic groups (non-Hispanic [NH] white, NH black, NH American Indian/Alaskan Native, NH Asian and Pacific Islander, and Hispanics) and five strata of urban/rural classifications of residence (large, mid-sized, small, adjacent, and non- metropolitan areas). NH black individuals living in large metropolitan areas experienced the longest median duration from diagnosis to treatment initiation (33 days), which was 8 days (95% CI=7.8, 8.2) longer than NH white individuals in large metropolitan cities. Longer durations among NH black were also present among those who live in mid-sized (6 days difference, 95% CI=5.6, 6.4), small (6 days, 95% CI=5.4, 6.6), adjacent (4 days, 95% CI=3.4, 4.6), and non-metropolitan areas (5 days, 95% CI=3.9, 6, .1), albeit smaller in size. Among Hispanic individuals newly diagnosed with cancer, those in large to small metropolitan cities also experienced longer duration from diagnosis to treatment when compared to NH white individuals in those areas (coef.=3 days [95% CI=2.8. 3.2], 2 days [95% CI=1.7, 2.3], and 3 days [95% CI=2.4, 3.6] for large, mid-sized, and small metropolitans); those in adjacent and non-metropolitan areas had slightly shorter duration from diagnosis to treatment (coef.=-1 day [95%=-1.7, -0.3] and -1 day [95% CI=-1.9, -0.1] respectively). NH American Indian/Alaskan Native also experienced longer duration from diagnosis to treatment compared to NH white individuals, and there were no variations across urban/rural areas. Similarly, NH Asian and Pacific Islander individuals had an estimated 3 days longer duration from diagnosis to treatment regardless of their residential areas, except that those who lived in non-metropolitan areas experienced even longer delays (coef.= 7 days [95% CI=5.7, 8.3]) compared to NH white individuals. This study highlights significant racial/ethnic disparities in time to cancer treatment, particularly for NH black individuals in large metropolitan areas. Addressing these disparities is essential for improving cancer care equity.

Radiotherapy deserts: Impact of race, poverty and the rural-urban continuum on density of radiation oncologists in the United States
AW LaVigne, TL DeWeese… - International Journal of …, 2021 - redjournal.org
Purpose/Objective(s)
In the landmark work of Bates et al. (2020), per capita distribution of radiation oncologists was strongly linked to rural-urban continuum status. To build on this effort and further isolate resource-poor “radiotherapy deserts,” we investigated associations between physician density and rural-urban continuum status, race, poverty, & prostate (PC) and invasive breast (BC) cancer metrics at the county level.
Materials/Methods
We created an ecologic study model using data from US HRSA Area Health Resources Files, USDA Economic Research Service, and the AMA Physician Masterfile. The NIH Cancer State Profiles provided cancer-specific incidence and death rates per county. Physician to person at risk (PPR) density was defined as the number of attending-level radiation oncologists per 100,000 persons at risk (males and females ≥ 35 years for PC and BC, respectively). Uni- and multivariable regressions evaluated relationships between PPR density and race, percent poverty, and metro (vs. nonmetro) status per rural-urban continuum definitions. Logistic regression tested links between > 2 standard deviations (2SD) above mean cancer-specific incidence & death rates and PPR density, race, & metro status. Reported statistics are P < .05.
Results
Mean PPR density is 2.1 (SD 5.9) for PC and 1.9 (SD 5.3) for BC. Univariable analyses show higher PPR density is significantly associated with metro status (β coefficients 2.9 and 2.6), lower %poverty (both -.1), lower %White (-1.4 and -1.3) and higher %Black (2.5 and 2.2) for PC and BC, respectively. The table below shows β coefficients for PPR density on racial distribution by metro status, controlling for %poverty. For both PC and BC, lower %White and higher %Black race are associated with higher PPR density in metro but not nonmetro counties. This pattern may be due to higher %Black concentration in metro counties with the largest populations, which may be linked to nominal resource density. Such an association is absent in nonmetro counties. For PC and BC, respectively, mean (SD) incidence rate is 102.4 (25.6) and 120 (20.1), and death rate is 20.8 (6) and 21.4 (4.8). For PC, higher odds of > 2SD death rate but not incidence is tied to lower PPR density (odds ratio .9), whereas for BC, higher odds of both are associated with lower PPR density (.8 and .9, respectively). For both BC and PC, higher odds of these cancer metrics are also linked to higher %Black or nonmetro status.
Conclusion
Radiation oncology PPR density is intricately linked to counties’ rural-urban status, poverty rate, and racial distributions. Inverse relationships between PPR density and PC & BC incidence or death rates reveal mismatch in distributions between resources and need, particularly when considering race and nonmetro status. Interactive density maps at bit.ly/density maps show “radiotherapy deserts” for targeting interventions.

The impact of the United States Commission on Civil Rights in the struggle for racial equality in America: The problems in urban housing, employment and criminal …
RS Baker
1990•elibrary.ru
The United States Commission on Civil Rights (the Commission) was created on September 9, 1957 as an aspect of the Civil Rights Act of 1957. The purpose was to investigate allegations of civil rights violations; study and collect information on civil rights developments; and appraise the laws and policies of the Federal government with respect to equal protection of the law . In its first seven years of existence the Commission primarily concerned itself, as illustrated in Foster Rhea Dulles''work The Civil Rights Commission: 1957-1965, with voting rights violations of minorities . As the Jim Crow policy of segregation and discrimination began to be legally dismantled, new problems emerged with respect to urban discrimination. Consequently, the Commission began to undertake the responsibility for finding new solutions to the urban problems associated with housing, employment and criminal justice.
As Hanes Walton indicates in his book, When the Marching Stopped: The Politics of Civil Rights Regulatory Agencies, only one study (Dulles) has been completed on the history of the Commission . While Dulles''work is necessary in order to understand the historical developments of the Commission, there is a void in its history that pertains to the Commission''s involvement with urban issues.

Examining the relationship between urban landscapes and racial disparity in COVID-19 infection rate in the United States
B Jiang
Forum: Creating restorative environments in high-density cities during the …, 2021•hub.hku.hk
There is striking racial disparity in the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection rates in the United States. We hypothesize that the disparity is significantly smaller in areas with a higher ratio of green spaces. County level data on the SARS-CoV-2 infection rates of black and white individuals in 135 of the most urbanized counties across the United States were collected. The total population in these counties is 132,350,027, comprising 40.3% of the U.S. population. The ratio of green spaces by land-cover type in each county was extracted from satellite imagery. A hierarchical regression analysis measured cross-sectional associations between racial disparity in infection rates and green spaces, after controlling for socioeconomic, demographic, pre-existing chronic disease, and built-up area factors. We found a higher ratio of green spaces at the county level is significantly associated with a lower racial disparity in infection rates. Four green space factors have significant negative associations with the racial disparity in SARS-CoV-2 infection rates. Five core mechanisms and one circumstantial mechanism are identified to interpret the findings.

RACIAL DISPARITIES IN RURAL-URBAN MORTALITY GAP IN THE UNITED STATES: A 24-YEAR LONGITUDINAL STUDY
N Ferdows, SB Ferdows, A Kumar
Innovation in Aging, 2019•pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
Abstract
Although overall life expectancy in the US has improved rapidly over the course of the 20th century and the racial gap in all-cause mortality has declined in recent decades, geographical disparities in mortality have increased in the last three decades. This research aims to study racial and geographical disparities by comparing the race and sex-specific mortality trends of the US rural and urban populations. We created a longitudinal county level analytic file of the US population 65 years and older, over the period of 1968 to 2015 obtained from CDC-WONDER and Area Health Resources Files. First, we used an OLS regression of age-adjusted mortality rate onto year indicators interaction with race and gender to depict the race and sex-specific trend in age-adjusted mortality rates. We also estimated the change in in mortality rate over time, for each race and gender, relative to values in 1968. Finally, we estimated race and sex specific trend in rural-urban mortality gap using state fixed effects regression. Our results indicate that racial gap in mortality rates has only declined in urban areas. Mortality rates of the whites in rural areas declined more rapidly than their Black counterparts, resulting in a gap that has been widening in the last three decades. The racial gap has increased considerably for males residing in rural counties not adjacent to an urban county. Thus, racial disparity in mortality has increased in rural areas, with a considerable widening between white and black male population living in the more remote rural areas.

Pediatric cancer incidence among racial/ethnic groups living in rural/urban areas of the United States
PB Shetty, PJ Lupo, ME Scheurer
Cancer Research, 2022•aacrjournals.org
Abstract
Background: The impact of urban/rural residence on pediatric cancer incidence has not been well studied. Additionally, the impact of race/ethnicity on pediatric cancer incidence by urban/rural status has not been evaluated, which could inform our understanding of the roles of shared genetic and environmental causes of these malignancies.
Methods: Using SEER18, we calculated pediatric cancer incidences for individuals diagnosed 2000-2018 by residence (urban/rural). Next we calculated incidence rate ratios (IRR) to evaluate the role of race/ethnicity on incidence stratified by urban vs. rural status.
Results: See Table. Overall, most incidences were similar by residence, i.e., lower or equal in rural versus urban areas, except the rural group having significantly lower incidences of leukemias and germ cell tumors (GCTs). Additionally, the incidence of most pediatric cancers was consistently higher among NHW in both urban and rural areas. Yet, incidence of some cancers differed by urban/rural residence within race/ethnicity: retinoblastoma (NHB, Hispanic, and API); soft tissue sarcomas (NHB and AI/AN); hepatic tumors (AI/AN); and GCTs (API).
Conclusions: In general, Hispanic, NHB, and AI/AN populations have similar incidence of pediatric cancers in urban or rural areas. These groups have some shared bio-geographical ancestry, suggesting a possible effect of genetics on risk. Further, differences in incidence by urban/rural residence within race/ethnicity suggest a possible role of environment for some cancers. Interestingly, for GCTs, NHB had a lower IRR in urban and rural areas, but Hispanic populations had a significantly higher IRR. This finding, consistent with a recent study in adults, suggest that African ancestry may confer a protective effect on risk of GCTs. Further, the GCT effect sizes were more protective in the rural group for each race/ethnicity group, suggesting the possible role of environmental factors and interactions of environment with ancestry.
Pediatric cancer incidence by race/ethnicity group and urban/rural residence

Current Trends in Same-Sex Couples in the United States: How Race and Gender Affect Education, Income Levels, and Urban Living
EL Haley - 2018 - scholars.unh.edu
Since the 1990s, there has been increased efforts to study the LGBT community in the
United States. While nationally-representative surveys like the American Community Survey
(ACS) have made it easier to collect data on same-sex couples, there have historically been
few largely representative surveys on the LGBT population. Black et al.(2000) discuss the
history of demographic studies on gay and lesbian populations in the United States, finding
that many studies relied on techniques such as convenience sampling, preventing them …

Racial Segregation: Processes and Policies in the United States
M Turner, H Wolman
Herodote, 2006•shs.cairn.info
This paper describes the processes producing residential racial segregation in American cities and suggests the extent to which these processes arise from characteristics of the American system that are relatively unique. It also sets forth the extent of racial segregation, how it has changed over time, and research on the consequences of racial segregation, insisting on the unique situation of the Black population, being by far the most segregated in the United States. Finally it describes and discusses US housing policies that have been used to address the problem of racial segregation, their design, accomplishments, and shortcomings.

Trends in Aortic Dissection Mortality Rates by Race and Urban-Rural Classification in the United States, 1999-2019
A Cash, A Minhas, RW Ariss, KR Ahuja, S Nazir
Circulation, 2021•ahajournals.org
Introduction: Despite evolving risk assessment and surgical interventions, acute aortic dissection (AD) remains a life-threatening condition with a high mortality rate. Here, we report urban-rural and racial differences in AD related mortality rates in the US.
Methods: Death certificate data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Wide-Ranging Online Data for Epidemiologic Research database were used to determine all-cause AD-related mortality trends from 1999 to 2019 among adults older than twenty-five. The National Center for Health Statistics Urban-Rural Classification Scheme was used to divide our population into urban (≥1 million), medium metropolitan (50,000–999,999) and rural (<50,000) counties per the 2013 census classification. Age-adjusted mortality rates (AAMRs) per 100,000 people and annual percentage change (APC) with 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated.
Results: Following a period of decreasing AAMRs prior to 2012, Non-Hispanic White (NHW) and non-Hispanic Black (NHB) AAMRs increased significantly between 2012 and 2019 (APC 2.6 [95% CI 2.0 to 3.2] and APC 4.0 [95% CI 2.5 to 5.5], respectively). Hispanic and/or Latino (HL) AAMRs also increased between 2014 and 2019. NHB AAMRs were consistently higher compared to NHWs and HLs. Similar trends emerge when stratifying by metropolitan area (Figure 1). Following a period of decreasing AAMRs prior to 2013, urban AAMRs increased significantly between 2013 and 2019 (APC 2.8 [95% CI 1.8 to 3.9]). Similarly, medium metropolitan and rural AAMRs increased between 2012 and 2019 (APC 2.6 [95% CI 1.6 to 3.7] and APC 3.3 [95% CI 1.6 to 5.0], respectively) following a period of decreasing AAMRs prior to 2012.
Conclusions: AD death rates among all races and urban-rural subgroups are increasing over the past five to ten years, reversing a decreasing trend from the prior decade. To mitigate the burden of AD-related mortality, future studies are needed to examine the reasons for these observed trends.

The relationship between capital accumulation, types of jobs, educational attainment, race, gender and urban poverty in the United States between 1968 and …
J Hopwood
2009•search.proquest.com
Abstract
There has been a continuous debate as to the types of jobs available in a changing US labor market since the 1980s. On the one hand, there is the argument that the economy has produced predominantly good jobs. On the other, there is overwhelming evidence that posits polarization of the labor market into high and low status jobs. The problem with this debates is that both sides seem to accept variations in the labor market as an inevitable act of life. In this regard very little attention has been given to the cause of the inevitable fluctuations in the labor market. Other contributors to the debate have argued that oscillations in the labor market are the result of the wanton expansion of capital. The problem here is that while they have correctly linked the American economy to the global economy and have focused on the global effect of capitalism; they have not paid enough attention on the effect of capital accumulation on the local economy of the United States.

Housing and Race in Industrial Society
DH McKay
2020•taylorfrancis.com
This is a comparative study of the relationship between civil rights law, housing and urban policy in Britain and the United States. It focuses on the ways in which governments have attempted to remove racial discrimination and disadvantage in private and public sector housing. The study, first published in 1977, does not simply consist of an account of administrative and judicial attempts to remove discrimination. A major concern is to place civil rights laws in their total political, economic and social environments. The book explains and compares the nature of racial residential change in both countries, and assesses the impact of civil rights law on existing patterns of discrimination and disadvantage. Other public policies, in particular housing and urban policies, are examined and their relationship to anti-discrimination measures is analysed. In explaining differences between the two countries, emphasis is placed on the role of government in urban society, the political economies of urban areas, and the social and political differences between minority groups. Finally, the study identifies the limits to effective civil rights law enforcement and provides some indication as to the policy alternatives open to decision-makers in the two countries.

Housing and Race in Industrial Society: Civil Rights and Urban Policy in Britain and the United States. By David H. McKay.(Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Littlefield, 1977 …
D Lockard
American Political Science Review, 1978•cambridge.org
Racial discrimination in housing in both the United States and Britain has long been a serious problem, but both nations have preferred to ignore the issue, or if action is taken it usually has been ineffective, limited, and without important consequences for the bulk of victims of discrimination. Indeed experience indicates that antidiscrimination legislation is designed to appear to be addressing the problem while in fact doing little or nothing to modify racially discriminatory housing practices. Loopholes are left in the laws purposely to minimize their impact. For example, an agency is established to administer an antidiscrimination law, but barriers are fixed so the agency will not achieve much. The agency may be woefully understaffed, or it may be required to proceed on a case-complaint basis resulting in, at best, the solutions to problems of specific individuals, but making no dent in the prevailing and widespread discriminatory housing practices. There are other ways to hobble administrators of these laws. An agency may be https://doi. org/10.2307/1954643

United States and Canada-Region, Race, and Cities: Interpreting the Urban South. By David Goldfield. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1997. Pp. 309 …
G Wright
The Journal of Economic History, 1999•cambridge.org
230 Book Reviews implications of urbanization for race relations, employment opportunities, and political power. There is one policy-oriented item, written for the Southern Growth Policies Board, arguing that southern cities should take active steps to retain their links with the past, as a deliberate strategy in intercity competition. If the region is in danger of losing touch with its history, it is indeed a New South.

RACIAL AND ETHNIC DISPARITIES IN HEALTH CARE ACCESS, AFFORDABILITY, AND CARDIOVASCULAR SCREENING PERSIST BETWEEN AND WITHIN …
AN Kyalwazi, RW Yeh, Y Wang, R Wadhera
Journal of the American College of Cardiology, 2022•jacc.org
Background
Rural adults experience higher cardiovascular (CV) mortality rates than adults in urban areas, but less is known about racial/ethnic disparities between and within these areas.
Methods
We used the BRFSS to identify adults> 18 years living in rural and urban areas of the US in 2018-2019. We used logistic regression models to estimate the association between living in a rural (vs. urban) area and measures of health care access, affordability, and CV screening, after adjusting for age/sex for each racial/ethnic group. We used this approach to examine racial/ethnic differences within rural and urban areas.
Results
Black adults living in urban areas, compared to those in rural areas, were more likely to have healthcare coverage (OR 1.42, 95% CI 1.19-1.69), less likely to have forgone/delayed medical care due to cost (0.77, 0.66-0.89), and less likely to have never had cholesterol checked (0.65, 0.44-0.95). White adults living in urban (vs. rural) areas were more likely to have coverage (1.60, 1.50-1.70), less likely to have forgone medical care due to cost (0.85, 0.81-0.89), and less likely to have never had cholesterol checked (0.67, 0.61-0.74). These patterns were similar for Hispanic adults. There were marked racial/ethnic disparities in health care access, affordability, and CV screening within rural and urban areas (Table).
Conclusion
Public health and policy strategies are needed to address the marked racial/ethnic disparities in health care access, affordability, and CV screening in the US.

Rural–Urban Disparities in Mortality Related to Alcohol-Associated Liver Disease by Race/Ethnicity in the United States From 1999 to 2022
Introduction
Mortality related to alcohol-associated liver disease (ALD) has been increasing over the past two decades, especially in racial and ethnic minorities and those living in rural areas. The interaction between rurality, race and ethnicity in mortality disparities is unclear.

Methods
This cross-sectional study extracted data from the Underlying Cause of Death database of CDC Wide-Ranging Online Database for Epidemiological Research (1999–2022). We estimated the age-adjusted mortality rates (AAMRs) for ALD among adults 25 years and older. We calculated the average annual percentage change (AAPC) using the Joinpoint regression program.

Results
There were 436,814 deaths related to ALD among US adults with rising mortality from 1999 (AAMR, 6.7) to 2022 (AAMR, 12.5) (AAPC, 2.7%). American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) individuals had the highest mortality in 2022 (AAMR, 76.8), followed by Hispanic individuals (AAMR, 14.1). Mortality increases in non-Hispanic White (NHW) individuals (AAPC, 4.0%) surpassed that of non-Hispanic Black (NHB) individuals (AAPC, 0.4%). The increase in AAMR was more pronounced in rural areas (AAPC, 4.1%) than large metropolitan areas (AAPC, 2.0%). For NHW, AI/AN, and Hispanic individuals, AAMRs in rural areas had greater increases than in large metropolitan areas. AAMRs remained largely stable in large metropolitan (AAPC, − 0.6%) and rural areas for NHB individuals (AAPC, 0.1%).

Discussion
There were significant and widening rural–urban disparities in ALD-related mortality among NHW, AI/AN, and Hispanic individuals. Mortality in NHB individuals remained largely stable. Targeted resources and efforts are essential to address the growing mortality burden in select populations.

Associations of race/ethnicity with HIV prevalence and HIV-related behaviors among young men who have sex with men in 7 urban centers in the United States
NT Harawa, S Greenland, TA Bingham, DF Johnson, SD Cochran, WE Cunningham…
JAIDS Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes, 2004•journals.lww.com
Abstract
Using data from a multisite venue-based survey of male subjects aged 15 to 22 years, we examined racial/ethnic differences in demographics, partner type, partner type-specific condom use, drug use, and HIV prevalence in 3316 US black, multiethnic black, Latino, and white men who have sex with men (MSM). We further estimated associations of these factors with HIV infection and their influence on racial/ethnic disparities in HIV prevalence. HIV prevalences were 16% for both black and multiethnic black participants, 6.9% for Latinos, and 3.3% for whites. Paradoxically, potentially risky sex and drug-using behaviors were generally reported most frequently by whites and least frequently by blacks. In a multiple logistic regression analysis, positive associations with HIV included older age, being out of school or work, sex while on crack cocaine, and anal sex with another male regardless of reported condom use level. Differences in these factors did not explain the racial/ethnic disparities in HIV prevalence, with both groups of blacks experiencing more than 9 times and Latinos experiencing approximately twice the fully adjusted odds of infection compared with whites. Understanding racial/ethnic disparities in HIV risk requires information beyond the traditional risk behavior and partnership type distinctions. Prevention programs should address risks in steady partnerships, target young men before sexual initiation with male partners, and tailor interventions to men of color and of lower socioeconomic status.

Housing and Race in Industrial Society
DH McKay
2020•taylorfrancis.com
This is a comparative study of the relationship between civil rights law, housing and urban policy in Britain and the United States. It focuses on the ways in which governments have attempted to remove racial discrimination and disadvantage in private and public sector housing. The study, first published in 1977, does not simply consist of an account of administrative and judicial attempts to remove discrimination. A major concern is to place civil rights laws in their total political, economic and social environments. The book explains and compares the nature of racial residential change in both countries, and assesses the impact of civil rights law on existing patterns of discrimination and disadvantage. Other public policies, in particular housing and urban policies, are examined and their relationship to anti-discrimination measures is analysed. In explaining differences between the two countries, emphasis is placed on the role of government in urban society, the political economies of urban areas, and the social and political differences between minority groups. Finally, the study identifies the limits to effective civil rights law enforcement and provides some indication as to the policy alternatives open to decision-makers in the two countries.

Associations of race/ethnicity with HIV prevalence and HIV-related behaviors among young men who have sex with men in 7 urban centers in the United States
NT Harawa, S Greenland, TA Bingham, DF Johnson, SD Cochran, WE Cunningham…
JAIDS Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes, 2004•journals.lww.com
Abstract
Using data from a multisite venue-based survey of male subjects aged 15 to 22 years, we examined racial/ethnic differences in demographics, partner type, partner type-specific condom use, drug use, and HIV prevalence in 3316 US black, multiethnic black, Latino, and white men who have sex with men (MSM). We further estimated associations of these factors with HIV infection and their influence on racial/ethnic disparities in HIV prevalence. HIV prevalences were 16% for both black and multiethnic black participants, 6.9% for Latinos, and 3.3% for whites. Paradoxically, potentially risky sex and drug-using behaviors were generally reported most frequently by whites and least frequently by blacks. In a multiple logistic regression analysis, positive associations with HIV included older age, being out of school or work, sex while on crack cocaine, and anal sex with another male regardless of reported condom use level. Differences in these factors did not explain the racial/ethnic disparities in HIV prevalence, with both groups of blacks experiencing more than 9 times and Latinos experiencing approximately twice the fully adjusted odds of infection compared with whites. Understanding racial/ethnic disparities in HIV risk requires information beyond the traditional risk behavior and partnership type distinctions. Prevention programs should address risks in steady partnerships, target young men before sexual initiation with male partners, and tailor interventions to men of color and of lower socioeconomic status.

 Housing and Race in Industrial Society
DH McKay
2020•taylorfrancis.com
This is a comparative study of the relationship between civil rights law, housing and urban policy in Britain and the United States. It focuses on the ways in which governments have attempted to remove racial discrimination and disadvantage in private and public sector housing. The study, first published in 1977, does not simply consist of an account of administrative and judicial attempts to remove discrimination. A major concern is to place civil rights laws in their total political, economic and social environments. The book explains and compares the nature of racial residential change in both countries, and assesses the impact of civil rights law on existing patterns of discrimination and disadvantage. Other public policies, in particular housing and urban policies, are examined and their relationship to anti-discrimination measures is analysed. In explaining differences between the two countries, emphasis is placed on the role of government in urban society, the political economies of urban areas, and the social and political differences between minority groups. Finally, the study identifies the limits to effective civil rights law enforcement and provides some indication as to the policy alternatives open to decision-makers in the two countries.

Housing and Race in Industrial Society: Civil Rights and Urban Policy in Britain and the United States. By David H. McKay.(Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Littlefield, 1977 …
D Lockard
American Political Science Review, 1978•cambridge.org
Racial discrimination in housing in both the United States and Britain has long been a serious problem, but both nations have preferred to ignore the issue, or if action is taken it usually has been ineffective, limited, and without important consequences for the bulk of victims of discrimination. Indeed experience indicates that antidiscrimination legislation is designed to appear to be addressing the problem while in fact doing little or nothing to modify racially discriminatory housing practices. Loopholes are left in the laws purposely to minimize their impact. For example, an agency is established to administer an antidiscrimination law, but barriers are fixed so the agency will not achieve much. The agency may be woefully understaffed, or it may be required to proceed on a case-complaint basis resulting in, at best, the solutions to problems of specific individuals, but making no dent in the prevailing and widespread discriminatory housing practices. There are other ways to hobble administrators of these laws. 

The location and racial composition of public housing in the United States: An analysis of the racial occupancy and location of public housing developments
JM Goering, A Kamely, T Richardson
1994•books.google.com
Focuses primarily upon African-American and white families, although data are also presented on Hispanics and Asians living in public housing. Combines 3 databases-the Multifamily Tenant Characteristics System, the Project Address File and 1990 Census tract data-to assess the concentration of assisted households in poor, disadvantaged and minority communities. Over 100 tables, graphs and charts.
